tools/context-compiler/README.md, before:

# Context Compiler

Local-only deterministic repo context builder for Stagecraft. Builds a searchable context snapshot from your repository documentation and specifications.

## Two paradigms: Agent vs AI-Agent

This README is about the **AI-Agent** paradigm, not the Stagecraft runtime **Agent**.

- **Agent**: Stagecraft runtime paradigm: CLI -> engine (lib) -> agent (daemon). This README does not cover that runtime agent.
- **AI-Agent**: Repo-analysis tooling paradigm: XRAY -> context-compiler -> AI-Agent (AI consumption layer). This tool lives in that pipeline.

## What Context Compiler does

Context Compiler deterministically packages declared repo knowledge (docs/spec/selected JSON artifacts) into `.ai-context/`:

- **Local-only**: No embedding or uploading
- **Deterministic digest**: Timestamps excluded from digest
- **Output**: Writes `.ai-context/` directory at repo root

## Installation

From the Stagecraft repo root:

```bash
npm --prefix tools/context-compiler install
```

## Usage

### Build Context

Build a deterministic context snapshot from your repository:

```bash
npm --prefix tools/context-compiler run context:build
```

This will:
- Scan `docs/`, `spec/`, `README.md`, and `Agent.md` by default
- Process `.md` and `.json` files
- Write output to `.ai-context/` at the repo root

**Intended consumers:**
- Primary: AI-Agent pipeline and LLM workflows
- Secondary: Humans for debugging/audit

**Output structure:**
```
.ai-context/
  meta.json          # Build metadata and options
  digest.txt         # Deterministic SHA256 digest
  files/
    manifest.json    # List of processed files
    chunks.ndjson    # All chunks in NDJSON format
```

**Customization:**

```bash
# Custom target directory
npm --prefix tools/context-compiler run context:build -- --target ./my-repo

# Custom output directory
npm --prefix tools/context-compiler run context:build -- --out ./custom-output

# Custom include paths (comma-separated)
npm --prefix tools/context-compiler run context:build -- --include "docs,spec,custom-docs"

# Custom file extensions (comma-separated)
npm --prefix tools/context-compiler run context:build -- --ext ".md,.txt,.json"
```

### XRAY Scanning (Optional but complementary)

XRAY is a structural reverse-engineering scanner that can analyze your codebase:

```bash
# Full scan with all features
npm --prefix tools/context-compiler run xray:all

# Quick scan
npm --prefix tools/context-compiler run xray:scan

# Generate documentation
npm --prefix tools/context-compiler run xray:docs
```

XRAY outputs are cached in `.xraycache/` at the repo root (and optional generated docs if supported by scripts). XRAY output is separate from `.ai-context/`.

### Context Compiler vs XRAY

| Aspect | Context Compiler | XRAY |
|--------|------------------|------|
| Input | Declared repo knowledge (docs/spec/selected JSON) | Codebase structure (reverse-engineering) |
| Purpose | Deterministic packaging for AI consumption | Structural analysis and documentation generation |
| Output | `.ai-context/` | `.xraycache/` (and optional generated docs) |
| Role in AI-Agent pipeline | Packages declared knowledge | Provides structural insights (complementary) |

## Output Format

### meta.json

Contains build metadata:
- `schemaVersion`: Version of the output schema
- `repoSlug`: Sanitized repository name
- `targetRoot`: Target directory (usually ".")
- `options`: Build options used (include paths, extensions)
- `counts`: File and chunk counts
- `digest`: SHA256 digest of the build
- `generatedAt`: ISO timestamp (not included in digest)

### manifest.json

Array of processed files:
```json
[
  {
    "path": "docs/README.md",
    "sha": "abc123...",
    "chunks": 5
  }
]
```

### chunks.ndjson

Newline-delimited JSON, one chunk per line:
```json
{"repoSlug":"stagecraft","path":"docs/README.md","kind":"section","startLine":1,"endLine":10,"sha":"def456...","text":"...","meta":{}}
```

Each chunk includes:
- `repoSlug`: Repository identifier
- `path`: Repo-relative file path
- `kind`: Chunk type (section, package, graph-node, etc.)
- `startLine` / `endLine`: Line range in source file
- `sha`: SHA1 of chunk content
- `text`: Chunk content
- `meta`: Additional metadata

### digest.txt

SHA256 digest computed from:
- Compiler version
- Normalized options
- Sorted list of (path, sha) pairs for all files

The digest is deterministic and does not include timestamps.

## Deterministic Builds

Builds are deterministic:
- Files are processed in lexicographic order
- Chunks are sorted by path, then startLine, then sha
- Digest excludes timestamps
- Paths are normalized to POSIX format

Running the same build with the same inputs produces identical outputs.

## File Processing

### Markdown Files

- Split by H2/H3 headings
- Each section becomes a chunk
- Headings are included in chunk text for better retrieval

### JSON Files

- **Graph JSON** (`/graphs/`): Per-node chunks + overview
- **Package JSON** (`/packages/`): Single concise card with metadata
- **Other JSON**: Single blob chunk

### Other Files

- Treated as plain text, single chunk per file

## Ignore Rules

XRAY uses ignore rules from `tools/context-compiler/xray/ignore.rules` (if present). Default ignores include:
- `.git`, `node_modules`, `dist`, `build`, `out`, `target`, `vendor`
- `.cache`, `.tmp`, `coverage`

## Notes

- The context compiler is **local-only** - no backend ingestion or embedding
- Old embedding/uploader code is kept but unused
- XRAY cache is stored in `.xraycache/` at repo root
- Both `.ai-context/` and `.xraycache/` are gitignored
- `.xraycache/` is separate from `.ai-context/` to maintain determinism: Context Compiler's digest must be deterministic and only include declared knowledge, while XRAY's structural analysis may vary

Commit message:

feat: implement Go-based Cortex Context Builder (Phase 4A/B)
- Implement core Context Builder in ai.agent/cortex/builder
- Add XRAY types in ai.agent/cortex/xray
- Implement deterministic chunking (text-only, 200 lines)
- Wire 'cortex context build' to use new builder
- Refactor 'cortex xray scan' for proper flag parsing
- Deprecate and neuter legacy 'tools/context-compiler'
- Add hermetic integration tests for XRAY scan and Context Build

tools/context-compiler/README.md, after:

> [!WARNING]
> **DEPRECATED / FORBIDDEN**
>
> `tools/context-compiler` is deprecated and must not be used.
>
> The authoritative pipeline is now:
> - `ai.agent/rust/xray` (Rust) -> `.xraycache/`
> - `ai.agent/cmd/cortex context build` (Go) -> `.ai-context/`
>
> Do not add new references to `npm run context:*`, `tsx`, or this directory in docs/specs.

# Context Compiler


Local-only deterministic repo context builder for Stagecraft. Builds a searchable context snapshot from your repository documentation and specifications.

## Two paradigms: Agent vs AI-Agent

This README is about the **AI-Agent** paradigm, not the Stagecraft runtime **Agent**.

- **Agent**: Stagecraft runtime paradigm: CLI -> engine (lib) -> agent (daemon). This README does not cover that runtime agent.
- **AI-Agent**: Repo-analysis tooling paradigm: XRAY -> context-compiler -> AI-Agent (AI consumption layer). This tool lives in that pipeline.

## What Context Compiler does

Context Compiler deterministically packages declared repo knowledge (docs/spec/selected JSON artifacts) into `.ai-context/`:

- **Local-only**: No embedding or uploading
- **Deterministic digest**: Timestamps excluded from digest
- **Output**: Writes `.ai-context/` directory at repo root

## Installation

From the Stagecraft repo root:

```bash
npm --prefix tools/context-compiler install
```

## Usage

### Build Context

Build a deterministic context snapshot from your repository:

```bash
npm --prefix tools/context-compiler run context:build
```

This will:
- Scan `docs/`, `spec/`, `README.md`, and `Agent.md` by default
- Process `.md` and `.json` files
- Write output to `.ai-context/` at the repo root

**Intended consumers:**
- Primary: AI-Agent pipeline and LLM workflows
- Secondary: Humans for debugging/audit

**Output structure:**
```
.ai-context/
  meta.json          # Build metadata and options
  digest.txt         # Deterministic SHA256 digest
  files/
    manifest.json    # List of processed files
    chunks.ndjson    # All chunks in NDJSON format
```

**Customization:**

```bash
# Custom target directory
npm --prefix tools/context-compiler run context:build -- --target ./my-repo

# Custom output directory
npm --prefix tools/context-compiler run context:build -- --out ./custom-output

# Custom include paths (comma-separated)
npm --prefix tools/context-compiler run context:build -- --include "docs,spec,custom-docs"

# Custom file extensions (comma-separated)
npm --prefix tools/context-compiler run context:build -- --ext ".md,.txt,.json"
```

### XRAY Scanning (Optional but complementary)

XRAY is a structural reverse-engineering scanner that can analyze your codebase:

```bash
# Full scan with all features
npm --prefix tools/context-compiler run xray:all

# Quick scan
npm --prefix tools/context-compiler run xray:scan

# Generate documentation
npm --prefix tools/context-compiler run xray:docs
```

XRAY outputs are cached in `.xraycache/` at the repo root (and optional generated docs if supported by scripts). XRAY output is separate from `.ai-context/`.

### Context Compiler vs XRAY

| Aspect | Context Compiler | XRAY |
|--------|------------------|------|
| Input | Declared repo knowledge (docs/spec/selected JSON) | Codebase structure (reverse-engineering) |
| Purpose | Deterministic packaging for AI consumption | Structural analysis and documentation generation |
| Output | `.ai-context/` | `.xraycache/` (and optional generated docs) |
| Role in AI-Agent pipeline | Packages declared knowledge | Provides structural insights (complementary) |

## Output Format

### meta.json

Contains build metadata:
- `schemaVersion`: Version of the output schema
- `repoSlug`: Sanitized repository name
- `targetRoot`: Target directory (usually ".")
- `options`: Build options used (include paths, extensions)
- `counts`: File and chunk counts
- `digest`: SHA256 digest of the build
- `generatedAt`: ISO timestamp (not included in digest)

### manifest.json

Array of processed files:
```json
[
  {
    "path": "docs/README.md",
    "sha": "abc123...",
    "chunks": 5
  }
]
```

### chunks.ndjson

Newline-delimited JSON, one chunk per line:
```json
{"repoSlug":"stagecraft","path":"docs/README.md","kind":"section","startLine":1,"endLine":10,"sha":"def456...","text":"...","meta":{}}
```

Each chunk includes:
- `repoSlug`: Repository identifier
- `path`: Repo-relative file path
- `kind`: Chunk type (section, package, graph-node, etc.)
- `startLine` / `endLine`: Line range in source file
- `sha`: SHA1 of chunk content
- `text`: Chunk content
- `meta`: Additional metadata

### digest.txt

SHA256 digest computed from:
- Compiler version
- Normalized options
- Sorted list of (path, sha) pairs for all files

The digest is deterministic and does not include timestamps.

## Deterministic Builds

Builds are deterministic:
- Files are processed in lexicographic order
- Chunks are sorted by path, then startLine, then sha
- Digest excludes timestamps
- Paths are normalized to POSIX format

Running the same build with the same inputs produces identical outputs.

## File Processing

### Markdown Files

- Split by H2/H3 headings
- Each section becomes a chunk
- Headings are included in chunk text for better retrieval

### JSON Files

- **Graph JSON** (`/graphs/`): Per-node chunks + overview
- **Package JSON** (`/packages/`): Single concise card with metadata
- **Other JSON**: Single blob chunk

### Other Files

- Treated as plain text, single chunk per file

## Ignore Rules

XRAY uses ignore rules from `tools/context-compiler/xray/ignore.rules` (if present). Default ignores include:
- `.git`, `node_modules`, `dist`, `build`, `out`, `target`, `vendor`
- `.cache`, `.tmp`, `coverage`

## Notes

- The context compiler is **local-only** - no backend ingestion or embedding
- Old embedding/uploader code is kept but unused
- XRAY cache is stored in `.xraycache/` at repo root
- Both `.ai-context/` and `.xraycache/` are gitignored
- `.xraycache/` is separate from `.ai-context/` to maintain determinism: Context Compiler's digest must be deterministic and only include declared knowledge, while XRAY's structural analysis may vary
