docs/context-handoff/GOV_V1_CORE-to-FRONTMATTER.md, before:

---

## 📋 NEXT AGENT CONTEXT — After Completing Feature GOV_V1_CORE (Phase 1)

---

## 🎉 LAYER 1: What Just Happened

### Feature Complete: GOV_V1_CORE (Phase 1)

**Feature ID**: `GOV_V1_CORE`

**Status**: ✅ Phase 1 implemented, fully tested, in `wip` status

**PR**: #16 (https://github.com/bartekus/stagecraft/pull/16)

**Commits**: 

- `7d96eff` - `feat: implement GOV_V1_CORE governance feature` (initial implementation)

- `be02194` - `test: add comprehensive tests and strengthen GOV_V1_CORE validators` (tests & enhancements)

### What Now Exists

**Packages**:

- `internal/tools/specschema/` - Spec frontmatter loading, validation, and integrity checks

- `internal/tools/cliintrospect/` - CLI command and flag introspection

- `internal/tools/features/` - Feature dependency graph, DAG validation, impact analysis

- `internal/tools/docs/` - Feature overview generation

- `internal/tools/specvscli/` - Spec vs CLI structural diff

**CLI Tools**:

- `cmd/spec-validate/` - Validates spec frontmatter (with `--check-integrity` flag)

- `cmd/cli-introspect/` - Introspects CLI and outputs JSON

- `cmd/features-tool/` - Feature dependency graph tool (`graph` and `impact` subcommands)

- `cmd/gen-features-overview/` - Generates `docs/features/OVERVIEW.md`

- `cmd/spec-vs-cli/` - Structural diff between specs and CLI implementation

**APIs Available**:

```go
// Spec Schema
specschema.LoadAllSpecs(root string) ([]Spec, error)
specschema.ValidateAll(specs []Spec) error
specschema.ValidateSpecIntegrity(featuresPath, specRoot string) error

// Features Graph
features.LoadGraph(path string) (*Graph, error)
features.ValidateDAG(g *Graph) error
features.Impact(g *Graph, featureID string) []string
features.ToDOT(g *Graph) string

// CLI Introspection
cliintrospect.Introspect(root *cobra.Command) []CommandInfo

// Docs Generation
docs.GenerateFeatureOverview(featuresPath, specRoot, outPath string) error

// Spec vs CLI
specvscli.CompareAllCommands(specs []Spec, cliCommands []CommandInfo) []DiffResult
```

**Files Created**:

- `spec/governance/GOV_V1_CORE.md` - Full specification with YAML frontmatter

- `internal/tools/specschema/model.go`

- `internal/tools/specschema/loader.go`

- `internal/tools/specschema/validator.go`

- `internal/tools/specschema/integrity.go`

- `internal/tools/specschema/specschema_test.go`

- `internal/tools/cliintrospect/introspect.go`

- `internal/tools/cliintrospect/cliintrospect_test.go`

- `internal/tools/features/model.go`

- `internal/tools/features/loader.go`

- `internal/tools/features/validator.go`

- `internal/tools/features/impact.go`

- `internal/tools/features/dot.go`

- `internal/tools/features/features_test.go`

- `internal/tools/docs/features_overview.go`

- `internal/tools/docs/docs_test.go`

- `internal/tools/specvscli/diff.go`

- `cmd/spec-validate/main.go`

- `cmd/cli-introspect/main.go`

- `cmd/features-tool/main.go`

- `cmd/gen-features-overview/main.go`

- `cmd/spec-vs-cli/main.go`

**Files Updated**:

- `spec/features.yaml` - Added `GOV_V1_CORE` entry (status: `wip`)

- `scripts/run-all-checks.sh` - Integrated governance checks with `--check-integrity` flag

**Test Coverage**:

- ✅ Comprehensive tests for all packages

- ✅ Edge cases and error handling covered

- ✅ Deterministic output verified

- ✅ All tools compile successfully

**Key Features**:

- ✅ YAML frontmatter extraction and validation

- ✅ Domain ↔ path alignment validation

- ✅ Version format validation (v1, v2, etc.)

- ✅ Features.yaml ↔ spec file integrity checks

- ✅ Deterministic sorting throughout (specs, flags, impact results, DOT output)

- ✅ Type/default/description alignment in spec-vs-cli

- ✅ Feature dependency DAG with cycle detection

- ✅ Impact analysis (transitive dependencies)

- ✅ Feature overview generation

---

## 🎯 LAYER 2: Immediate Next Task

### Add Frontmatter to All Existing Spec Files

**Task**: Add YAML frontmatter to all existing spec files so they pass validation

**Why**: Governance tools are integrated into CI with hard-fail mode active (Phase 3). CI will fail until all specs have valid frontmatter. Adding frontmatter is required for governance checks to pass.

**Status**: `todo` (blocking - CI currently fails until this is complete)

**Dependencies**:

- ✅ `GOV_V1_CORE` Phase 1 (ready - tools exist)

- ✅ Spec files exist (ready)

**⚠️ SCOPE REMINDER**: Add frontmatter ONLY. Do not modify spec content, behavior, or structure. Only add the YAML frontmatter block at the top of each file.

**Reference Spec**: `spec/governance/GOV_V1_CORE.md` section 4.1

---

### 🧪 MANDATORY WORKFLOW — Validation First

**Before adding frontmatter**:

1. **Run validation** to see current state:

   ```bash
   go run ./cmd/spec-validate --check-integrity
   ```

2. **For each spec file** (`spec/**/*.md`):

   - Extract feature ID from filename (e.g., `spec/commands/build.md` → `build`)

   - Determine domain from path (e.g., `spec/commands/` → `commands`)

   - Check `spec/features.yaml` for feature status

   - Add frontmatter matching the schema:

   ```yaml
   ---
   feature: <FEATURE_ID>
   version: v1
   status: <todo|wip|done>  # From features.yaml
   domain: <domain>  # From path (commands, core, governance, etc.)
   inputs:
     flags: []  # Add if CLI command has flags
   outputs:
     exit_codes: {}  # Add if spec documents exit codes
   ---
   ```

3. **Validate after each addition**:

   ```bash
   go run ./cmd/spec-validate --check-integrity
   ```

4. **Check integrity**:

   ```bash
   go run ./cmd/spec-validate --check-integrity
   ```

**Frontmatter Requirements** (from `spec/governance/GOV_V1_CORE.md`):

- ✅ Required: `feature`, `version`, `status`, `domain`

- ✅ `feature` must match filename (e.g., `GOV_V1_CORE.md` → `GOV_V1_CORE`)

- ✅ `domain` must match path directory (e.g., `spec/commands/` → `commands`)

- ✅ `version` must be `v1`, `v2`, etc. (regex: `^v\d+$`)

- ✅ `status` must be one of: `todo`, `wip`, `done`

- ✅ Optional: `inputs.flags[]` for CLI commands

- ✅ Optional: `outputs.exit_codes` for commands with documented exit codes

**Files to Update**:

All `.md` files in `spec/` that don't have frontmatter. Check with:

```bash
go run ./cmd/spec-validate
```

**Integration Points**:

- Uses `specschema.LoadAllSpecs()` to discover all specs

- Uses `specschema.ValidateSpec()` to validate each spec

- Uses `specschema.ValidateSpecIntegrity()` to check features.yaml ↔ spec mapping

---

### 🛠 Implementation Outline

**1. Helper Functions Available**:

```go
// Extract feature ID from path
specschema.ExpectedFeatureIDFromPath(path string) string
// Example: "spec/commands/build.md" → "build"

// Infer domain from path
specschema.inferDomainFromPath(path string) string
// Example: "spec/commands/build.md" → "commands"
```

**2. Frontmatter Template** (minimal):

```yaml
---
feature: <ID>
version: v1
status: <status>
domain: <domain>
---
```

**3. Frontmatter Template** (with optional fields):

```yaml
---
feature: <ID>
version: v1
status: <status>
domain: <domain>
inputs:
  flags:
    - name: --env
      type: string
      default: ""
      description: "Target environment"
outputs:
  exit_codes:
    success: 0
    error: 1
---
```

**4. Workflow**:

- Read each spec file

- Extract feature ID from filename

- Extract domain from path

- Look up status in `spec/features.yaml`

- Add frontmatter at top of file (before existing content)

- Validate with `go run ./cmd/spec-validate`

**5. Required Files**:

- All `spec/**/*.md` files (except `spec/governance/GOV_V1_CORE.md` which already has it)

- `spec/features.yaml` (reference for status values)

---

### 🧭 CONSTRAINTS (Canonical List)

**The next agent MUST NOT**:

- ❌ Modify existing governance tool behavior (unless fixing bugs)

- ❌ Change validation rules without updating spec

- ❌ Skip frontmatter validation

- ❌ Modify spec content when adding frontmatter (frontmatter only)

- ❌ Change governance behaviour for Phase 2/3 without considering that Phase 3 is already active and frontmatter is still incomplete

- ❌ Add frontmatter that doesn't match filename/domain

- ❌ Use invalid status values (must be `todo`, `wip`, or `done`)

- ❌ Use invalid version format (must be `v1`, `v2`, etc.)

- ❌ Add flags/exit_codes that aren't documented in the spec content

**The next agent MUST**:

- ✅ Add frontmatter that matches filename (feature ID)

- ✅ Add frontmatter that matches path (domain)

- ✅ Use status from `spec/features.yaml`

- ✅ Validate after each change

- ✅ Keep frontmatter minimal (only required fields + documented flags/exit codes)

- ✅ Follow deterministic ordering (tools already handle this)

- ✅ Run `go run ./cmd/spec-validate --check-integrity` before committing

- ✅ Preserve all existing spec content (only prepend frontmatter)

---

## 📌 LAYER 3: Secondary Tasks

### Complete GOV_V1_CORE (Phase 2 & 3)

**Feature ID**: `GOV_V1_CORE`

**Status**: `wip` (Phase 1 complete, Phase 2 complete, Phase 3 active)

**Dependencies**: 

- ✅ Phase 1 (complete)

- ✅ Phase 2 (complete - governance checks integrated)

- ✅ Phase 3 (active - hard-fail mode enabled)

- ⏸ All specs have frontmatter (required for governance checks to pass)

**Phase 2**: ✅ **Complete** - Governance checks integrated into CI

**Phase 3**: ✅ **Active** - Hard-fail mode enabled

- ✅ Removed `--warn-only` from `run-all-checks.sh` (hard-fail by default)

- ✅ CI will fail on any governance violation

- ⏸ All specs need frontmatter (prerequisite - this is the next task)

**Note**: `--warn-only` flag is still available for local development convenience (e.g., `go run ./cmd/spec-vs-cli --warn-only`), but CI uses hard-fail mode by default.

**Important**: Phase 3 (hard-fail mode) is already active. CI will fail until all specs have frontmatter. This is expected behavior and provides pressure to complete the frontmatter rollout. The ideal rollout order (frontmatter first, then hard-fail) was not followed, but the system is coherent: hard-fail is on, failures are expected until frontmatter is complete, and frontmatter addition is the immediate next task.

**Reference Spec**: `spec/governance/GOV_V1_CORE.md` section 6 (Rollout)

---

## 🎓 Architectural Context (For Understanding)

**Why These Design Decisions Matter**:

- **Deterministic Output**: All tools sort output lexicographically to ensure CI stability and reproducible results

- **Frontmatter Validation**: Enforces machine-readable spec structure, enabling automated checks and tooling

- **Integrity Checks**: Ensures features.yaml and spec files stay in sync, preventing drift

- **Domain Validation**: Enforces consistent organization (commands, core, governance, etc.)

- **Version Format**: Enables future spec versioning and migration tooling

**Integration Pattern Example**:

```go
// Example: How to add frontmatter to a spec file
// 1. Read existing spec
// 2. Extract feature ID from filename
// 3. Determine domain from path
// 4. Check features.yaml for status
// 5. Add frontmatter at top of file
// 6. Validate with: specschema.ValidateSpec()

// Example frontmatter structure:
---
feature: CLI_BUILD
version: v1
status: done  # From spec/features.yaml
domain: commands  # From spec/commands/ path
inputs:
  flags:
    - name: --env
      type: string
      default: ""
      description: "Target environment"
outputs:
  exit_codes:
    success: 0
    error: 1
---
```

---

## 📝 Output Expectations

**When completing frontmatter addition**:

1. **Summary**: All spec files now have valid YAML frontmatter

2. **Commit Message** (follow this format):

```
feat(GOV_V1_CORE): add frontmatter to all spec files

Add YAML frontmatter to all existing spec files to enable governance validation.

Summary:
- Added frontmatter to N spec files
- All frontmatter validated against schema
- Features.yaml ↔ spec integrity verified
- All governance checks now pass

Files:
- spec/commands/*.md (N files)
- spec/core/*.md (N files)
- spec/providers/*.md (N files)
- ... (all spec files)

Validation:
- go run ./cmd/spec-validate --check-integrity passes
- All feature IDs match filenames
- All domains match paths
- All statuses match features.yaml

Feature: GOV_V1_CORE
Spec: spec/governance/GOV_V1_CORE.md
```

3. **Verification**:

   - ✅ All specs have valid frontmatter

   - ✅ `go run ./cmd/spec-validate --check-integrity` passes

   - ✅ Feature IDs match filenames

   - ✅ Domains match paths

   - ✅ Statuses match `spec/features.yaml`

   - ✅ No spec content was modified (frontmatter only)

---

## ⚡ Quick Start for Next Agent

**Bootloader Instructions**:

1. **Load Context**:

   - Read `spec/governance/GOV_V1_CORE.md` for frontmatter schema

   - Read `internal/tools/specschema/validator.go` to understand validation rules

   - Read `spec/features.yaml` to get feature statuses

   - Run `go run ./cmd/spec-validate` to see current validation state

2. **Begin Work**:

   - Task: Add frontmatter to existing specs

   - Create feature branch: `feature/GOV_V1_CORE-frontmatter` (or continue on existing branch)

   - Start by identifying specs without frontmatter

   - Add frontmatter one file at a time

   - Validate after each addition

3. **Follow Semantics**:

   - Feature ID from filename (use `specschema.ExpectedFeatureIDFromPath()`)

   - Domain from path (use `specschema.inferDomainFromPath()`)

   - Status from `spec/features.yaml`

   - Version: `v1` for all existing specs

4. **Respect Constraints**:

   - See CONSTRAINTS section (canonical list)

   - Do not modify spec content

   - Do not skip validation

   - Keep frontmatter minimal

---

## ✅ Final Checklist

Before starting work:

- [ ] Feature ID identified: `GOV_V1_CORE` (continuing Phase 1 → Phase 2/3)

- [ ] Git hooks verified

- [ ] Working directory clean

- [ ] On feature branch: `feature/governance-core-v1` (or new branch)

- [ ] Spec located: `spec/governance/GOV_V1_CORE.md`

- [ ] Validation tools tested: `go run ./cmd/spec-validate`

- [ ] Current validation state understood

- [ ] Ready to add frontmatter

---

**Copy this entire document into your next agent session to continue development.**

This document is optimized for deterministic AI handoff and aligns with Stagecraft's Agent.md principles (spec-first, test-first, feature-bounded, deterministic).

Commit message:

docs(DOCS_GOVERNANCE): add canonical doc enforcement tooling
Add CI guardrail, evolution log generator, and coverage ledger automation
to enforce canonical documentation homes and prevent documentation sprawl.

- Add check-doc-patterns.sh: CI guardrail for forbidden doc patterns
- Add generate-evolution-log.sh: Scaffold provider evolution logs
- Add append-coverage-snapshot.sh: Append-only coverage ledger automation
- Integrate into .github/workflows/docs-governance.yml (first-class CI check)
- Update Agent.md with mandatory canonical documentation homes section
- Mark legacy docs as superseded (preserved for historical reference)

All scripts are bash 3.2+ compatible and portable across macOS/Linux.

Spec: docs/governance/GOVERNANCE_ALMANAC.md
Tests: scripts/*.sh (verified portable)

docs/context-handoff/GOV_V1_CORE-to-FRONTMATTER.md, after:

> **Superseded by** `docs/context-handoff/CONTEXT_LOG.md`. Kept for historical reference. New context handoffs MUST be added to the context log.

---

## 📋 NEXT AGENT CONTEXT — After Completing Feature GOV_V1_CORE (Phase 1)

---

## 🎉 LAYER 1: What Just Happened

### Feature Complete: GOV_V1_CORE (Phase 1)

**Feature ID**: `GOV_V1_CORE`

**Status**: ✅ Phase 1 implemented, fully tested, in `wip` status

**PR**: #16 (https://github.com/bartekus/stagecraft/pull/16)

**Commits**: 

- `7d96eff` - `feat: implement GOV_V1_CORE governance feature` (initial implementation)

- `be02194` - `test: add comprehensive tests and strengthen GOV_V1_CORE validators` (tests & enhancements)

### What Now Exists

**Packages**:

- `internal/tools/specschema/` - Spec frontmatter loading, validation, and integrity checks

- `internal/tools/cliintrospect/` - CLI command and flag introspection

- `internal/tools/features/` - Feature dependency graph, DAG validation, impact analysis

- `internal/tools/docs/` - Feature overview generation

- `internal/tools/specvscli/` - Spec vs CLI structural diff

**CLI Tools**:

- `cmd/spec-validate/` - Validates spec frontmatter (with `--check-integrity` flag)

- `cmd/cli-introspect/` - Introspects CLI and outputs JSON

- `cmd/features-tool/` - Feature dependency graph tool (`graph` and `impact` subcommands)

- `cmd/gen-features-overview/` - Generates `docs/features/OVERVIEW.md`

- `cmd/spec-vs-cli/` - Structural diff between specs and CLI implementation

**APIs Available**:

```go
// Spec Schema
specschema.LoadAllSpecs(root string) ([]Spec, error)
specschema.ValidateAll(specs []Spec) error
specschema.ValidateSpecIntegrity(featuresPath, specRoot string) error

// Features Graph
features.LoadGraph(path string) (*Graph, error)
features.ValidateDAG(g *Graph) error
features.Impact(g *Graph, featureID string) []string
features.ToDOT(g *Graph) string

// CLI Introspection
cliintrospect.Introspect(root *cobra.Command) []CommandInfo

// Docs Generation
docs.GenerateFeatureOverview(featuresPath, specRoot, outPath string) error

// Spec vs CLI
specvscli.CompareAllCommands(specs []Spec, cliCommands []CommandInfo) []DiffResult
```

**Files Created**:

- `spec/governance/GOV_V1_CORE.md` - Full specification with YAML frontmatter

- `internal/tools/specschema/model.go`

- `internal/tools/specschema/loader.go`

- `internal/tools/specschema/validator.go`

- `internal/tools/specschema/integrity.go`

- `internal/tools/specschema/specschema_test.go`

- `internal/tools/cliintrospect/introspect.go`

- `internal/tools/cliintrospect/cliintrospect_test.go`

- `internal/tools/features/model.go`

- `internal/tools/features/loader.go`

- `internal/tools/features/validator.go`

- `internal/tools/features/impact.go`

- `internal/tools/features/dot.go`

- `internal/tools/features/features_test.go`

- `internal/tools/docs/features_overview.go`

- `internal/tools/docs/docs_test.go`

- `internal/tools/specvscli/diff.go`

- `cmd/spec-validate/main.go`

- `cmd/cli-introspect/main.go`

- `cmd/features-tool/main.go`

- `cmd/gen-features-overview/main.go`

- `cmd/spec-vs-cli/main.go`

**Files Updated**:

- `spec/features.yaml` - Added `GOV_V1_CORE` entry (status: `wip`)

- `scripts/run-all-checks.sh` - Integrated governance checks with `--check-integrity` flag

**Test Coverage**:

- ✅ Comprehensive tests for all packages

- ✅ Edge cases and error handling covered

- ✅ Deterministic output verified

- ✅ All tools compile successfully

**Key Features**:

- ✅ YAML frontmatter extraction and validation

- ✅ Domain ↔ path alignment validation

- ✅ Version format validation (v1, v2, etc.)

- ✅ Features.yaml ↔ spec file integrity checks

- ✅ Deterministic sorting throughout (specs, flags, impact results, DOT output)

- ✅ Type/default/description alignment in spec-vs-cli

- ✅ Feature dependency DAG with cycle detection

- ✅ Impact analysis (transitive dependencies)

- ✅ Feature overview generation

---

## 🎯 LAYER 2: Immediate Next Task

### Add Frontmatter to All Existing Spec Files

**Task**: Add YAML frontmatter to all existing spec files so they pass validation

**Why**: Governance tools are integrated into CI with hard-fail mode active (Phase 3). CI will fail until all specs have valid frontmatter. Adding frontmatter is required for governance checks to pass.

**Status**: `todo` (blocking - CI currently fails until this is complete)

**Dependencies**:

- ✅ `GOV_V1_CORE` Phase 1 (ready - tools exist)

- ✅ Spec files exist (ready)

**⚠️ SCOPE REMINDER**: Add frontmatter ONLY. Do not modify spec content, behavior, or structure. Only add the YAML frontmatter block at the top of each file.

**Reference Spec**: `spec/governance/GOV_V1_CORE.md` section 4.1

---

### 🧪 MANDATORY WORKFLOW — Validation First

**Before adding frontmatter**:

1. **Run validation** to see current state:

   ```bash
   go run ./cmd/spec-validate --check-integrity
   ```

2. **For each spec file** (`spec/**/*.md`):

   - Extract feature ID from filename (e.g., `spec/commands/build.md` → `build`)

   - Determine domain from path (e.g., `spec/commands/` → `commands`)

   - Check `spec/features.yaml` for feature status

   - Add frontmatter matching the schema:

   ```yaml
   ---
   feature: <FEATURE_ID>
   version: v1
   status: <todo|wip|done>  # From features.yaml
   domain: <domain>  # From path (commands, core, governance, etc.)
   inputs:
     flags: []  # Add if CLI command has flags
   outputs:
     exit_codes: {}  # Add if spec documents exit codes
   ---
   ```

3. **Validate after each addition**:

   ```bash
   go run ./cmd/spec-validate --check-integrity
   ```

4. **Check integrity**:

   ```bash
   go run ./cmd/spec-validate --check-integrity
   ```

**Frontmatter Requirements** (from `spec/governance/GOV_V1_CORE.md`):

- ✅ Required: `feature`, `version`, `status`, `domain`

- ✅ `feature` must match filename (e.g., `GOV_V1_CORE.md` → `GOV_V1_CORE`)

- ✅ `domain` must match path directory (e.g., `spec/commands/` → `commands`)

- ✅ `version` must be `v1`, `v2`, etc. (regex: `^v\d+$`)

- ✅ `status` must be one of: `todo`, `wip`, `done`

- ✅ Optional: `inputs.flags[]` for CLI commands

- ✅ Optional: `outputs.exit_codes` for commands with documented exit codes

**Files to Update**:

All `.md` files in `spec/` that don't have frontmatter. Check with:

```bash
go run ./cmd/spec-validate
```

**Integration Points**:

- Uses `specschema.LoadAllSpecs()` to discover all specs

- Uses `specschema.ValidateSpec()` to validate each spec

- Uses `specschema.ValidateSpecIntegrity()` to check features.yaml ↔ spec mapping

---

### 🛠 Implementation Outline

**1. Helper Functions Available**:

```go
// Extract feature ID from path
specschema.ExpectedFeatureIDFromPath(path string) string
// Example: "spec/commands/build.md" → "build"

// Infer domain from path
specschema.inferDomainFromPath(path string) string
// Example: "spec/commands/build.md" → "commands"
```

**2. Frontmatter Template** (minimal):

```yaml
---
feature: <ID>
version: v1
status: <status>
domain: <domain>
---
```

**3. Frontmatter Template** (with optional fields):

```yaml
---
feature: <ID>
version: v1
status: <status>
domain: <domain>
inputs:
  flags:
    - name: --env
      type: string
      default: ""
      description: "Target environment"
outputs:
  exit_codes:
    success: 0
    error: 1
---
```

**4. Workflow**:

- Read each spec file

- Extract feature ID from filename

- Extract domain from path

- Look up status in `spec/features.yaml`

- Add frontmatter at top of file (before existing content)

- Validate with `go run ./cmd/spec-validate`

**5. Required Files**:

- All `spec/**/*.md` files (except `spec/governance/GOV_V1_CORE.md` which already has it)

- `spec/features.yaml` (reference for status values)

---

### 🧭 CONSTRAINTS (Canonical List)

**The next agent MUST NOT**:

- ❌ Modify existing governance tool behavior (unless fixing bugs)

- ❌ Change validation rules without updating spec

- ❌ Skip frontmatter validation

- ❌ Modify spec content when adding frontmatter (frontmatter only)

- ❌ Change governance behaviour for Phase 2/3 without considering that Phase 3 is already active and frontmatter is still incomplete

- ❌ Add frontmatter that doesn't match filename/domain

- ❌ Use invalid status values (must be `todo`, `wip`, or `done`)

- ❌ Use invalid version format (must be `v1`, `v2`, etc.)

- ❌ Add flags/exit_codes that aren't documented in the spec content

**The next agent MUST**:

- ✅ Add frontmatter that matches filename (feature ID)

- ✅ Add frontmatter that matches path (domain)

- ✅ Use status from `spec/features.yaml`

- ✅ Validate after each change

- ✅ Keep frontmatter minimal (only required fields + documented flags/exit codes)

- ✅ Follow deterministic ordering (tools already handle this)

- ✅ Run `go run ./cmd/spec-validate --check-integrity` before committing

- ✅ Preserve all existing spec content (only prepend frontmatter)

---

## 📌 LAYER 3: Secondary Tasks

### Complete GOV_V1_CORE (Phase 2 & 3)

**Feature ID**: `GOV_V1_CORE`

**Status**: `wip` (Phase 1 complete, Phase 2 complete, Phase 3 active)

**Dependencies**: 

- ✅ Phase 1 (complete)

- ✅ Phase 2 (complete - governance checks integrated)

- ✅ Phase 3 (active - hard-fail mode enabled)

- ⏸ All specs have frontmatter (required for governance checks to pass)

**Phase 2**: ✅ **Complete** - Governance checks integrated into CI

**Phase 3**: ✅ **Active** - Hard-fail mode enabled

- ✅ Removed `--warn-only` from `run-all-checks.sh` (hard-fail by default)

- ✅ CI will fail on any governance violation

- ⏸ All specs need frontmatter (prerequisite - this is the next task)

**Note**: `--warn-only` flag is still available for local development convenience (e.g., `go run ./cmd/spec-vs-cli --warn-only`), but CI uses hard-fail mode by default.

**Important**: Phase 3 (hard-fail mode) is already active. CI will fail until all specs have frontmatter. This is expected behavior and provides pressure to complete the frontmatter rollout. The ideal rollout order (frontmatter first, then hard-fail) was not followed, but the system is coherent: hard-fail is on, failures are expected until frontmatter is complete, and frontmatter addition is the immediate next task.

**Reference Spec**: `spec/governance/GOV_V1_CORE.md` section 6 (Rollout)

---

## 🎓 Architectural Context (For Understanding)

**Why These Design Decisions Matter**:

- **Deterministic Output**: All tools sort output lexicographically to ensure CI stability and reproducible results

- **Frontmatter Validation**: Enforces machine-readable spec structure, enabling automated checks and tooling

- **Integrity Checks**: Ensures features.yaml and spec files stay in sync, preventing drift

- **Domain Validation**: Enforces consistent organization (commands, core, governance, etc.)

- **Version Format**: Enables future spec versioning and migration tooling

**Integration Pattern Example**:

```go
// Example: How to add frontmatter to a spec file
// 1. Read existing spec
// 2. Extract feature ID from filename
// 3. Determine domain from path
// 4. Check features.yaml for status
// 5. Add frontmatter at top of file
// 6. Validate with: specschema.ValidateSpec()

// Example frontmatter structure:
---
feature: CLI_BUILD
version: v1
status: done  # From spec/features.yaml
domain: commands  # From spec/commands/ path
inputs:
  flags:
    - name: --env
      type: string
      default: ""
      description: "Target environment"
outputs:
  exit_codes:
    success: 0
    error: 1
---
```

---

## 📝 Output Expectations

**When completing frontmatter addition**:

1. **Summary**: All spec files now have valid YAML frontmatter

2. **Commit Message** (follow this format):

```
feat(GOV_V1_CORE): add frontmatter to all spec files

Add YAML frontmatter to all existing spec files to enable governance validation.

Summary:
- Added frontmatter to N spec files
- All frontmatter validated against schema
- Features.yaml ↔ spec integrity verified
- All governance checks now pass

Files:
- spec/commands/*.md (N files)
- spec/core/*.md (N files)
- spec/providers/*.md (N files)
- ... (all spec files)

Validation:
- go run ./cmd/spec-validate --check-integrity passes
- All feature IDs match filenames
- All domains match paths
- All statuses match features.yaml

Feature: GOV_V1_CORE
Spec: spec/governance/GOV_V1_CORE.md
```

3. **Verification**:

   - ✅ All specs have valid frontmatter

   - ✅ `go run ./cmd/spec-validate --check-integrity` passes

   - ✅ Feature IDs match filenames

   - ✅ Domains match paths

   - ✅ Statuses match `spec/features.yaml`

   - ✅ No spec content was modified (frontmatter only)

---

## ⚡ Quick Start for Next Agent

**Bootloader Instructions**:

1. **Load Context**:

   - Read `spec/governance/GOV_V1_CORE.md` for frontmatter schema

   - Read `internal/tools/specschema/validator.go` to understand validation rules

   - Read `spec/features.yaml` to get feature statuses

   - Run `go run ./cmd/spec-validate` to see current validation state

2. **Begin Work**:

   - Task: Add frontmatter to existing specs

   - Create feature branch: `feature/GOV_V1_CORE-frontmatter` (or continue on existing branch)

   - Start by identifying specs without frontmatter

   - Add frontmatter one file at a time

   - Validate after each addition

3. **Follow Semantics**:

   - Feature ID from filename (use `specschema.ExpectedFeatureIDFromPath()`)

   - Domain from path (use `specschema.inferDomainFromPath()`)

   - Status from `spec/features.yaml`

   - Version: `v1` for all existing specs

4. **Respect Constraints**:

   - See CONSTRAINTS section (canonical list)

   - Do not modify spec content

   - Do not skip validation

   - Keep frontmatter minimal

---

## ✅ Final Checklist

Before starting work:

- [ ] Feature ID identified: `GOV_V1_CORE` (continuing Phase 1 → Phase 2/3)

- [ ] Git hooks verified

- [ ] Working directory clean

- [ ] On feature branch: `feature/governance-core-v1` (or new branch)

- [ ] Spec located: `spec/governance/GOV_V1_CORE.md`

- [ ] Validation tools tested: `go run ./cmd/spec-validate`

- [ ] Current validation state understood

- [ ] Ready to add frontmatter

---

**Copy this entire document into your next agent session to continue development.**

This document is optimized for deterministic AI handoff and aligns with Stagecraft's Agent.md principles (spec-first, test-first, feature-bounded, deterministic).
